## The Landscape

The existence of databases like Riak is the culmination of two basic trends: accessible technology spurring different data requirements, and gaps in the data management market.

<!-- image: landscape -->

First, as we've seen steady improvements in technology along with reductions in cost, vast amounts of computing power and storage are now within the grasp of nearly anyone. Along with our increasingly interconnected world caused by the web and shrinking, cheaper computers (like smartphones), this has catalyzed an exponential growth of data, and a demand for more predictability and speed by savvier users. In other words, more data is being created on the front-end, while more data is being managed on the backend.

Second, relational database management systems (RDBMS) have become focused over the years for a standard set of use-cases, like business intelligence. They were also technically tuned for squeezing performance out of single larger servers, like optimizing disk access, even while cheap commodity (and virtualized) servers made horizontal growth increasingly attractive. As cracks in relational implementations became apparent, custom implementations arose in response to specific problems not originally envisioned by the relational DBs.

These new databases are collected under the moniker *NoSQL*, and Riak is of its ilk.

### Database Models

Modern databases can be loosely grouped into the ways they represent data. Although I'm presenting 5 major types (the last 4 are considered NoSQL models), these lines are often blurred---you can use some key/value stores as a document store, you can use a relational database to just store key/value data.

<bloquote>
<h3>Aside: A Quick note on JOINs</h3>

Unlike relational databases, but similar to document and columnar stores, objects cannot be joined by Riak. Client code is responsible for accessing values and merging them, or by other code such as MapReduce.

The ability to easily join data across physical servers is a tradeoff that separates single node databases like relational and graph, from *naturally partitionable* systems like document, columnar, and key/value stores.

This limitation changes how you model data. Relational normalization (organizing data to reduce redundancy) exists for systems that can cheaply join data together per request. However, the ability to spread data across multiple nodes requires a denormalized approach, where some data is duplicated, and computed values may be stored for the sake of performance.
</bloquote>

<!-- image: icons for each of these types -->

  1. **Relational**. Traditional databases usually use SQL to model and query data.
    They are useful for data which can be stored in a highly structured schema, yet
    require flexible querying. Scaling a relational database (RDBMS) traditionally
    occurs by more powerful hardware (vertical growth).

    Examples: *PostgreSQL*, *MySQL*, *Oracle*
  2. **Graph**. These exist for highly interconnected data. They excel in
    modeling complex relationships between nodes, and many implementations can
    handle multiple billions of nodes and relationships (or edges and vertices). I tend to include *triplestores* and *object DBs* as specialized variants.

    Examples: *Neo4j*, *Graphbase*, *InfiniteGraph*
  3. **Document**. Document datastores model hierarchical values called documents,
    represented in formats such as JSON or XML, and do not enforce a document schema.
    They generally support distributing across multiple servers (horizontal growth).

    Examples: *CouchDB*, *MongoDB*, *Couchbase*
  4. **Columnar**. Popularized by [Google's BigTable](http://research.google.com/archive/bigtable.html),
    this form of database exists to scale across multiple servers, and groups similar data into
    column families. Column values can be individually versioned and managed, though families
    are defined in advance, not unlike RDBMS schemas.

    Examples: *HBase*, *Cassandra*, *BigTable*
  5. **Key/Value**. Key/Value, or KV stores, are conceptually like hashtables,
    where values are stored and accessed by an immutable key. They range from
    single-server varieties like *Memcached* used for high-speed caching, to
    multi-datacenter distributed systems like *Riak Enterprise*.

    Examples: *Riak*, *Redis*, *Voldemort*
