## Datatypes

A new feature in Riak 2.0 are datatypes. Rather than the opaque values of days past, these new additions allow a user to define the type of values that are accepted under a given bucket type. In addition to the benefits listed in the previous chapter of automatic conflict resolution, you also interact with datatypes in a different way.

<aside id="crdt" class="sidebar"><h3>CRDT</h3>

In the previous chapter I said that Riak datatypes are implemented as CRDTs. The definition of CRDT given was Conflict-free Replicated Data Types. This is only partially correct. In fact, there are two variants of CRDTs, namely, describing how they attempt to keep the replicated datatypes Conflict-free. They are Convergent (CvRDT) and Commutative (CmRDT).

CmRDTs are datatypes that are updated with commutative operations. CvRDTs ensure that disparate states converge to a single value. This distinction is interesting in Riak, because Basho actually implements both. You interface with datatypes by commutative operations (meaning, it doesn't matter which takes place first), while any underlying divergent states will eventually converge.
</aside>

In normal Riak operations, as we've seen, you put a value with a given key into a type/bucket object. If you wanted to store a map, say, as a JSON object representing a person, you would put the entire object with every field/value as an operation.

```bash
curl -XPOST "$RIAK/types/json/buckets/people/keys/joe" \
  -H "Content-Type:application/json"
  -d '{"name_register":"Joe", "pets_set":["cat"]}'
```

But if you wanted to add a `fish` as a pet, you'd have to replace the entire object.

```bash
curl -XPOST "$RIAK/types/json/buckets/people/keys/joe" \
  -H "Content-Type:application/json"
  -d '{"name_register":"Joe", "pets_set":["cat", "fish"]}'
```

As we saw in the previous chapter, this runs the risk of conflicting, thus creating a sibling.

```
{"name_register":"Joe", "pets_set":["cat"]}
{"name_register":"Joe", "pets_set":["cat", "fish"]}
```

But if we used a map, we'd instead issue only updates to create a map. So, assume that the bucket type `map` is of a map datatype (we'll see how operators can assign datatypes to bucket types in the next chapter). This command will insert a map object with two fields (`name_register` and `pets_set`).

```bash
curl -XPOST "$RIAK/types/map/buckets/people/keys/joe" \
  -H "Content-Type:application/json"
  -d '{
    "update": {
      "name_register": "Joe"
      "pets_set": {
        "add_all": "cat"
      }
    }
  }'
```

Next, we want to update the `pets_set` contained within `joe`'s map. Rather than set Joe's name and his pet cat, we only need to inform the object of the change. Namely, that we want to add a `fish` to his `pets_set`.

```bash
curl -XPOST "$RIAK/types/map/buckets/people/keys/joe" \
  -H "Content-Type:application/json"
  -d '{
    "update": {
      "pets_set": {
        "add": "fish"
      }
    }
  }'
```

This has a few benefits. Firstly, we don't need to send duplicate data. Second, it doesn't matter what order the two requests happen in, the outcome will be the same. Third, because the operations are CmRDTs, there is no possibility of a datatype returning siblings, making your client code that much easier.

As we've noted before, there are four Riak datatypes: *map*, *set*, *counter*, *flag*. The object type is set as a bucket type property. However, when populating a map, as we've seen, you must suffix the field name with the datatype that you wish to store: \*\_map, \*\_set, \*\_counter, \*\_flag. For plain string values, there's a special \*\_register datatype suffix.

You can read more about [datatypes in the docs](http://docs.basho.com/riak/latest/dev/using/data-types).
